# Maintaining the MIxS Schema

This repo contains the MIxS schema for environmental packages and checklists along with the code needed to generate different formats of the schema using [LinkML] (). 

Pages generated by this code will be served via a branch (see below) and linked from https://github.com/GenomicsStandardsConsortium/gensc.github.io.

The source files are at:

 * model/
    * [schema/](model/schema/) -- schema files
       * [mixs.yaml](model/schema/mixs.yaml) - container module
       * [terms.yaml](model/schema/terms.yaml) - all terms (fields/slots)
       * [checklists.yaml](model/schema/checklists.yaml) - checklists, e.g. MIMAG
       * [soil.yaml](model/schema/soil.yaml) - soil package
       * ...OTHER PACKAGES HERE

Ths source files are are the files that should be edited to create a new release.

## Dependencies
In order to make new release of the schema, you must have the following installed on your sytem:
- [pipenv](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/)
- [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/installing.html)
- [linkml](https://github.com/linkml/linkml)

A Pipfile.lock is include in the repository, but you can rebuild the lock file by executing `pipenv install -d`.

## Workflow for adding new CHECKLISTS

Edit [checklists.yaml](model/schema/checklists.yaml)

The easiest thing to do is to copy and paste an existing checklist, modifying the values

You will need to specify both `slots` and `slot_usage`

## Workflow for adding new TERMS

Edit [terms.yaml](model/schema/terms.yaml)

The easiest thing to do is to copy and paste an existing term, e.g.

```yaml
  barometric_press:
    is_a: environment field
    aliases:
    - barometric pressure
    description: Force per unit area exerted against a surface by the weight of air
      above that surface
    range: quantity value
    examples:
    - value: 5 millibar
    comments:
    - 'Preferred unit: millibar'
    slot_uri: MIXS:0000096
```

The range field will be one of:

 - string
 - integer
 - float
 - quantity value
 - an enum

## Workflow for creating a new ENUM

TODO

## Workflow for adding new ENVIRONMENTAL PACKAGES

Create a NEW file in [model/schema](model/schema/)

The easiest thing to do is to copy an existing package and edit it to include the terms you need in the package. 


## Workflow for tracking changes

As you make you make changes to the MIxS Schema, it is **HIGHLY** recomended that you update the [change log](changelogs/) in order to easily document the changes when a release is made. In the [change log](changelogs/), the set of changes that have **not** been released appear under the section titled `Current (update before releasing)`. As you update the schema, add information to the following sections:
#### Added
  - Add information about new classes, slots, enums, etc. added to the schema.
#### Fixed
  - Add information about changes made to the schema that **fixes** a problem.
#### Changed 
  - Add information about changes made to the schema that were not made to fix a problem.
#### Removed
  - Add information about classes, slot, enums etc. removed from the schema

In each of the [change log](changelogs/) sections, it is helpful if you mention the issue that the change was meant to address. For example:  
#### Added
  - `alternative identifiers` slot added to biosamples (cf. issue 75).

See the [change log](changelogs/) for other examples.

TODO: automate creation of change log.

## Generating new artifacts
This should be done in a branch. When ready for a release, artifacts are copied to the release folder using `make generated/mixs.py`.

TODO: add more details here.


## Deploying Documentation

TODO: describe the process of generating documentation.

See the makefile for details for now.


## Making a PyPI release of the MIxS Schema

**The text below is copied from NMDC. It will need to be updated once we decide if and how to put MIxS on PyPi.**

The NMDC Schema is deployed to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/nmdc-schema/) via the [pypi-publish](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/.github/workflows/pypi-publish.yml) github action.

The steps for making a release are:
1. Generate the set of artifacts by running `make clean` followed by `make all`.
2. If **#1** succeeds and changes have been made to the schema, update the `version` in [nmdc.yaml](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/src/schema/nmdc.yaml) using the format `YYYY.MM.DD`. Note: Changes can be made to the Python package (e.g., functionality added to the CLI) that do not affect the schema. In these cases, the schema does not need to be changed.
3. If **#1** succeeds:
  * Make the sure the sections of the [Change log](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) (discussed above) have been updated appropriately.
  * Change the `Current (update before releasing)` section of the [Change log](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) into a hyperlink that matches the tag you assign to the release in step **#4** below.  
  For example if the tag assigned for the release is `2021.07.01rc1`, change the section to:  
  ```
  [2021.07.01rc1](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/releases/tag/2021.07.01rc1)
  ```
4. Create a Github release of the schema using the `Releases -> Draft new release` links. The tag of the release must conform to the format `YYYY.MM.DDrc<num>`, where `<num>` is a sequential number of the releases made for that day. For example, if two releases were made on `2021-07-01`, then the tags for that day would be `2021-07-01rc1`, `2021-07-01rc2`. The value of this tag needs to match the value you assigned to the `Current (update before releasing)` section in the [Change log](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) (discussed above).
5. Name the release using the format `release-<tag>`, where tag matches the value of the tag you created in **#4**.
6. Fill in the changes made for this release. This is most easily done by copying the information you recorded in the [Change log](https://github.com/microbiomedata/nmdc-schema/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).
7. Click `Publish release` button. This fires the action to update the [PyPI package](https://pypi.org/project/nmdc-schema/).


## Seeding the schema from google sheets

An early version of terms.yaml was by converting the legacy spreadhseet for MIxS6 using [mixs_converter.py](https://github.com/GenomicsStandardsConsortium/mixs/blob/mixs6_release/gsctools/mixs_converter.py). After the release of MIxS6, the yaml will switch to being Source of Truth, and there will be no need to generate from sheets. However, we retain the code in the repo, in case there is a need to generate yaml from spreadsheets in the future.

See the Makefile for details on regenerating the yaml from google sheets/excel.

# Making a MIxS Release

## Prepare release

- create a branch with the release number
- make all the needed changes to the yaml files (see above)
- generate new artifacts (see above)
- undergo review (TODO: add details)
- upate yaml files if needed based on review
- prepare documentation
  - make a branch from the branch that holds documentation
  - generate new web pages in that branch

## Make release on Github
- merge the branch on github and make a release with github, using the version name (e.g., v6.1 or v7)
- merge the new documentation branch into main documentation branch




