# MIxS: Minimum Information about any (X) Sequence

MIxS, or the Minimum Information about any (X) Sequence is a specification for describing the provenance of a neucleotide sequence. The standard/data model has Terms that help attribute a sequence with certain characteristics that help answer questions like -
* What do we know about the sample that the sequence came from?
* In what kind of an environment was the sample found?
* In what ways were the nucleic acids extracted, amplified, etc. from the sample?

Starting from v6 the MIxS standard is represented in and maintained using the [LinkML](https://linkml.io/linkml/) framework. LinkML uses YAML to define schemas and data models. You can refer to the [user-focused](#repository-structure)/[developer-focused](#developer-documentation) sections describing the repository structure to understand where to find these YAML files that are describing the MIxS standard.

The public-facing web documentation site can be browsed at: https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/

MIxS is divided into Checklists and Extensions (previously called Packages).

[Checklists](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/#checklists) include the required, recommended and optional metadata fields for a specific type of sequence (genome, metagenome, marker gene, etc.). For example, for genomic sequences (MIGS), there are checklists for specific taxa (Eukaryotes, Bacteria, Viruses, and Plants as hosts).

[Extensions](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/#extensions) supplement Checklists by providing additional terms to describe specific environments from which a sample was collected. For example, the Agriculture Extension has a number of terms to describe agricultural environments.

Extensions can be used in conjunction with any Checklist. We call them [Combinations](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/combinations/). For example, if you have sequenced a metagenome sample retrieved from an agricultural environment, then you would be able to use a Combination of the [Mims](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/0010007/) Checklist and [Agriculture](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/0016018/) Extension, called [MimsAgriculture](https://genomicsstandardsconsortium.github.io/mixs/0010003_0016018/).

## Repository Structure

Below is documentation about the contents of the various user-facing folders/directories in this repository.

* [examples/](examples/) - examples of different kinds of data files in different data formats in different (JSON, YAML) containing data conformant with MIxS standard
* [mixs-templates/](mixs-templates/) -  MIxS schema (meta)data collection templates in the Excel spreadsheet (.xlsx) format
* [project/](project/) - artifacts autogenerated by the suite of generators in the [linkml](https://github.com/linkml/linkml) library. Artifacts include JSON-LD, OWL, JSON Schema, spreadsheet, etc. representations of the schema
* [src/](src/)
  * [src/data/examples/](src/data/examples/) - valid and invalid data examples 
  * The folder structure (*valid* and *invalid* folders), and the corresponding YAML data examples in this directory need to follow guidelines in accordance with the `linkml-run-examples` *testing framework*
  * [src/mixs/](src/mixs/)
    * [src/mixs/schema/](src/mixs/schema/)
      * [src/mixs/schema/mixs.yaml](src/mixs/schema/mixs.yaml) - LinkML YAML schema representing the MIxS standard
  * [src/docs](src/docs) - markdown files that can be converted to HTML and included in the web documentation pages

## Developer Documentation

<details>
Use the `make` command to generate project artefacts:

* `make all`: make everything
* `make deploy`: deploys site
</details>

Documentation about the contents of the developer-focussed folders/directories in this repository.

* [assets/](assets/) - files consumed by, or generated by maintenance scripts in [src/scripts](src/scripts/)
* [src/](src/)
  * [src/mixs/](src/mixs/)
    * [src/mixs/datamodel/](src/mixs/datamodel/) - Python dataclasses artifact generated by running the LinkML Python generator on MIxS schema file
    * [src/mixs/schema/](src/mixs/schema/)
      * [src/mixs/schema/mixs.yaml](src/mixs/schema/mixs.yaml) - LinkML YAML schema representing the MIxS standard
  * [src/doc-templates/](src/doc-templates/) - jinja2 files that are responsible for the customization of layout and content of web documentation pages
  * [src/scripts](src/scripts) - Python scripts for specific discovery/exploration/inference based on the MIxS YAML schema
* [tests/](tests/) - test data files
* [config.yaml](config.yaml) - config file to custom specify arguments for the LinkML project generator
* [Makefile](Makefile) - Makefile containing pre-defined linkml-project-cookiecutter targets/rules
* [project.Makefile](project.Makefile) - file that can be modified to extend pre-defined rules in [Makefile](Makefile)

## Credits

This project was made with
[linkml-project-cookiecutter](https://github.com/linkml/linkml-project-cookiecutter).
